All right so in this video,
we're gonna look at polymorphism
and how it's an important part of the Python philosophy.
Now before I explain what polymorphism is,
let's have a look at some code
and talk about what's going on.
So I'm still in the game project we've been working on.
I'm gonna clear out all the code from our main programme.
I'm just gonna copy it all, delete the lot,
and I'm gonna start by typing in a = 3,
b = 2 in double quotes,
c = 1, 2, 3.
So we've got three variables, a, b, and c.
And I've typed x there and not c.
So a refers to an integer,
b to a string, and c to a topple.
Okay so let's print them out.
Okay let's run
and there's no real surprises at the result
when I run the programme.
So what that's done is pass three total different variables
to the print function
and it's happily printed out a value for each one.
So what's happening here is that each object
is behaving in a similar way when we try to print it.
So in addition to their behaviour
as an int, string, or a topple,
they also have printable behaviour.
So a is an int and we can subtract two ints
to work out their difference.
B is a string and you can't subtract strings in Python
so they are very different types of object,
but they also share printable behaviour and in that respect,
they behave like a different type of object,
an object that's printable.
Now that ability of objects to have different forms
is called polymorphism which just really means many forms.
Now in this particular example,
the polymorphic behaviour of the objects
is implemented using inheritance.
All Python objects inherit from a base class called object,
which defines an __str__ method.
So polymorphism allows the print function
to accept arguments of any type
and it's able to then print them out.
Now even Java programmers wouldn't be surprised at this
because you can do the same thing in Java.
And in fact, I'm gonna do something really strange now
and show you some Java code in a Python course.
So this slide shows some of the declarations
of the Java print method.
Now all the lines starting with asterisks are comments
so we're interested in the lines that start public void.
So ignore the public,
as we're not interested in scope or visibility in Java.
In statically typed languages like Java,
you have to specify the type of every parameter
and also the type of the result that methods return.
So here, void just means that these methods
don't return anything.
Now the first thing to notice
is that there are several versions of this print statement,
each one taking a different type of parameter.
Now Java's a statically typed language
and that means that the type of everything is checked
when the program's compiled.
So if you try to pass a string
to a method that expects an int,
then the programme won't compile.
Now in Python,
the type of something is only of interest when it's used
and that's because Python's a dynamically typed language.
So as you saw in the previous slide,
we've got quite a few versions of that print method here.
In fact, as we go to the next slide, there's more.
So in this slide we can see versions
that accept a char, an int, a long, a float, and a double.
And here we can see the remaining versions
that take an array of characters, a string, and an object.
Now all the methods call another method, write,
to do the printing,
but what most of them have in common
is that they call the String class' valueOf method
to get the string that should be printed.
Now the char and string versions are slightly different.
A string is already a string
so there's no need to do anything to convert it into one.
And an array of characters is close enough to a string
that there's no conversion needed there either.
But all the other methods use this String.valueOf method
to get the string representation of the thing to be printed.
By the way, this is what's meant by overloading methods.
You create different versions of the method
that take different parameters
and the compiler decides which one to use
based on the number and type of the parameters passed to it.
Now overloading isn't possible in Python and isn't necessary
and we've seen how to get the same effect
as having different numbers of parameters,
using named parameters with default values.
We automatically get the ability
to pass parameters of different types
because Python doesn't check the type of variables
when it compiles the code.
So in a statically typed language like Java,
if you want to print a string
then the compiler calls a version of the print method
that can print strings.
And if you wanna print an int
then the compiler calls the version that deals with int.
And similarly, with the last method on the slide,
to print an object,
the compiler calls this version that accepts a parameter
whose type is Object.
Now where it gets interesting
and also relevant to us as Python programmers
is what happens in the valueOf method
so let's actually have a look at that.
Once again, the methods have been overloaded
to cope with the various types of the parameters
that can be passed.
Now the interesting thing here is that none of these methods
attempts to work out what the value should be.
In all cases,
the valueOf method delegates the job of producing the string
to the class involved.
So if we wanna print an int,
the method calls the Integer class' toString method.
Similarly for Long, Float, and Double,
the toString method's called
to get the string representations of the object.
And it's the same for the other types too,
they just wouldn't fit on the screen
so the valueOf method delegates the task of deciding
what the string representation of each class should be,
to the class itself.
Now if valueOf just delegates the task to the class,
it doesn't really need to know what class it's dealing with.
In other words, whatever it gets,
it could just call the toString method
and return the result.
And that turns out to be exactly the approach
that Python takes.
Now I'm not gonna go
into the pros and cons of Java versus Python,
nor of statically versus dynamically typed languages.
I enjoy programming in both Java and Python
and each have their own uses.
What's important is the different philosophies adopted
by the two languages.
Now in Java, you have to specify exactly what type of object
you'll be dealing with.
Otherwise, the code won't even compile.
And that means that every method
knows exactly what it can do with the arguments it receives.
Now Python takes a completely different approach.
It doesn't care about what something is,
it's only interested in how each thing behaves.
So Python focuses on what something does,
without worrying about what type it is.
Now in both languages,
classes inherit from the topmost base class called object
and this base class defines a basic implementation
of the toString method, in the case of Java,
and the __str__ method in Python.
Now the default implementation isn't very pretty,
it just returns the name of the class and a hash code
or the address in memory where the object lives.
Now in both languages,
the polymorphic behaviour of the classes,
in the case of the toString and str methods,
is implemented using inheritance.
So polymorphism basically means
that objects can be more than one thing at the same time.
And then when int is a number,
so it's something you can use to perform arithmetic,
but it's also something that can be printed.
So inheritance is one way to implement polymorphism.
So in this example of making things printable,
every object can be printed,
as well as used for whatever else it does.
Now this is possible because every object
automatically inherits the __str__ method
from it's object base class in Python.
Now inheritance isn't the only way
to implement polymorphism.
Consider a ball and an orange.
They both have a similar shape
so we could juggle with balls
and we could also juggle with oranges,
if we can juggle at all of course,
but they don't inherit their round shape
from any common ancestor.
So a ball and an orange are totally unrelated,
but they can still share some properties
without inheriting them from a base class.
So to a juggler, balls and oranges have similar behaviour.
To a hungry person,
an orange probably has more in common with a loaf of bread
because both can be eaten.
So to stretch the example one more time before I move on,
a gardener may be more interested
in what happens when we plant the orange
and might consider it to have more in common with an acorn,
both can be used to grow a tree.
Okay so going back to our print example.
The print function in Python
doesn't have to cater for the possibility
that the thing it's being asked to print
may not have a suitable method to return a string.
And that's because every class automatically inherits
the method from the object base class.
So that's fine here,
the print function
can cope with anything that's passed to it
because whatever it is,
it's guaranteed to have a string method, str method.
But what bout our enemies in Python?
If we wrote a function
that accepted an Enemy as a parameter
and called the take_damage method of its parameter,
there's no real guarantee that the object we passed to it
would have a take_damage method in Python.
Now we could pass a Player instance to it, for example,
and we haven't given our Player class that method.
Now in Java, that wouldn't be a problem.
We'd have to specify Enemy, say,
as the type of the parameter
and the compiler would then check
that anything we passed did inherit from the Enemy class.
Now in Python though, there's no such checking.
Python isn't interested in the type of objects,
it's only interested in their behaviour
at the time they're used.
Okay so let's end the video here.
In the next video, let's see how all this relates
to Python code.
See you in the next video.